# Last Week in RISC-V: Friday September 21, 2018

## Introduction to Linux Kernel Development

For those of you interested in getting involved in the RISC-V Linux
kernel porting effort, I wrote a [short
email](http://lists.infradead.org/pipermail/linux-riscv/2018-September/001539.html)
that links to the various sources of information that might help people
get started.

## Developer Room at FOSDEM

I submitted a proposal for a RISC-V developer room at FOSDEM next
February.  Last year our talk went great and a room was suggested, so I
anticipate this will be accepted.  We should officially hear back about
the submission by the end of the month.  Thanks to Karsten for
[starting the thread that got the discussion
started](https://groups.google.com/a/groups.riscv.org/forum/?utm_medium=email&utm_source=footer#!msg/sw-dev/fndi2PKkDGU/ehOGUCQrFQAJ).

## RISC-V Buildroot Patch Submission

*Thanks to Mark Corbin from Embecosm for contributing this section*

I have a (hopefully final) set of patches out for RISCV-64 support on
Buildroot - see
http://lists.busybox.net/pipermail/buildroot/2018-September/230689.html

Until these patches make it into the repository... a version based on
Buildroot 2018.08-rc1 is available at
https://github.com/riscv/riscv-buildroot - see the github wiki for details.

## 32-bit `time_t` on RISC-V Systems

As part of submitting the C-SKY Linux kernel port (which I pay attention
to because they used the RISC-V port as a template), Arnd Bergmann
brought up the possibility of C-SKY submitting a Linux port free of
32-bit `time_t` interfaces.  I'd recently talked to some of the glibc
folks about this and we're hoping that the RISC-V port can be free of
32-bit `time_t` as well, and it's looking like things might line up to
do so for us.  There's more information available as part of [my hijack
of the C-SKY patch review
thread](https://lore.kernel.org/lkml/20180914143719.GA27689@guoren-Inspiron-7460/T/#u).

The official position here is that our 32-bit kernel ABI is not stable,
because we haven't submitted our glibc port yet.  This has been
discussed with the Linux community and they seem OK with it, hopefully
we'll soon have an upstream 32-bit glibc port so we can officially
declare ABI stability!

## RISC-V Microconference at Linux Plumbers

[Atish's RISC-V
Microconference](https://blog.linuxplumbersconf.org/2018/risc-v-microconference-accepted-for-linux-plumbers-conference/)
has officially been accepted as part of Linux Plumbers.  See [his
email](http://lists.infradead.org/pipermail/linux-riscv/2018-September/001516.html)
for more details.

## Events

* September 21st: [ORConf](https://orconf.org/) hosted by the Gdansk
  University of Technology in Gdansk, Poland.
* October 18: [RISC-V Day
  Tokyo](https://tmt.knect365.com/risc-v-day-tokyo/) hosted by Keio
  University in Tokyo, Japan.
* October 22: [RISC-V BoF at Embedded Linux Conference + IoT Summit
  Europe](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/elc-openiot-europe-2018/)
  hosted by The Linux Foundation in Edinburgh, UK.
* November 13: [RISC-V Microconference at Linux Plumbers
  Conference](https://blog.linuxplumbersconf.org/2018/) in Vancouver,
  Canada.
* December 3: [RISC-V Summit](https://tmt.knect365.com/risc-v-summit/)
  in Santa Clara, CA.

## Contributing to "Last Week in RISC-V"

Like everything else in the RISC-V ecosystem, this won't be possible as
just a one-man effort.  I'm hosting the sources at
[github.com/sifive/last-week-in-risc-v](https://github.com/sifive/last-week-in-risc-v),
so if you're comfortable editing them feel free to open a pull request.
If you don't want to get involved in GitHub then you're also welcome to
just mail me patches or blurbs for inclusion and I can merge them
together.

I don't really have any specific criteria as to what will or won't be
included.  Part of the reason I'm doing this is that the RISC-V
ecosystem has started to get big enough that there are huge sections of
it that I know nothing about, so I think the starting criteria will be
"anything I'm interested enough in to want to read" and we'll just go
from there!
