# Last Week in RISC-V: Friday September  7, 2018

## Linux 4.19-rc3

On Tuesday I tagged my pull request for Linux 4.19-rc3, which contains
what I hope to be the final RISC-V patch for 4.19.  The patch itself is
fairly boring: it just removes some broken and obsolete code related to
our initramfs support that causes initramfses to start working on RISC-V
systems.  The exciting part here is that this was found by Guenter Roeck
while he was bringing up his CI system, which means we now have CI
running on RISC-V Linux targets!

It's now time to start testing Linux 4.19 on RISC-V systems, let's see
if we can shake out whatever bugs are there before the release.

## Support for IMAC Systems in Linux

The RISC-V glibc port has supported ABIs without floating-point units
since our original patch submission, but we have yet to properly support
these systems natively in Linux due to a handful of problems with our
port.  Alan Kao from Andes recently published [version 7 of his patch
set](https://lkml.kernel.org/r/1535332075-5727-1-git-send-email-alankao@andestech.com)
that enables support for systems without the F or D extension in our
Linux port.

Since these are fairly major patches and we're outside the merge window
I've added them to our `linux-next` branch, which means they should get
merged during the 4.20 merge window in about 6 weeks.  If anyone is
interested in testing them out on FPU-free hardware (real or emulated)
now is a good time.  I'll let the patches bake for a bit before merging
them into `riscv-linux-4.18`.

## HiFive Unleashed Bootloader Release

Thanks to a bunch of hard work from Troy, we have officially released an
open source of the first two bootloader stages that come on the HiFive
Unleashed board.  More info can be seen in [Troy's blog
post](https://www.sifive.com/blog/2018/09/06/an-open-source-release-of-the-freedom-u540-c000s-bootloader/),
along with a competition to reproduce the exact binary of the zero-stage
bootloader in the mask ROM on the FU540-C000.

It's a timely release as well: I'm at the GNU Tools Cauldron today, and
when I was asked if we were planning on releasing the bootloader source
I could finally say "yes"!
