# Last Week in RISC-V: Friday September 14, 2018

## GNU Tools Cauldron Trip Report, Part 2

I was at the GNU tools cauldron last week.  I summarized the two BoF
sessions in [last week's entry](lwirv-2018-08-31.md).  While that was
the extent of the RISC-V specific events at the cauldron, I attended the
remainder of the cauldron where there were some great sessions.

### Vector ABI

I attended the aarch64 BoF session, where one of the major issues at
hand is to implement a system ABI that allows argument passing via SVE
registers.  This brought up a mirror in RISC-V land: a system ABI for
the V extension.  We had some discussions in person, which Richard
Henderson has [summarized on the GCC mailing
list](https://gcc.gnu.org/ml/gcc/2018-09/msg00037.html).  Designing an
ABI for the V extension will be a long and interesting project, but the
nice thing here is that we get to co design the system ABI along with
the V ISA extension in order to ensure we can build something solid.

### 16-bit Bytes

I ran into Simon Marchi at lunch on Sunday where he asked an
off-the-wall question about building a RISC-V system that was 16-bit
addressable.  It turns out he was running an entire [non-8-bit bytes
BoF](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/cauldron2018#non-8-bit-bof), where I
learned that there are a whole bunch of out-of-tree ports of the GNU
toolchains for architectures that aren't 8-bit addressable.  Most of
these architectures tend to be one-off DSPs and therefore aren't
publicly discussed, which results in a lot of duplicated work: since
there are no upstream architectures in GDB or GCC that have non-8-bit
bytes everyone has to keep fixing the same bugs for every port.

The main headache here is that none of the companies with these
proprietary DSPs are willing to share the ISA manuals or simulators, and
that you usually can't even buy the hardware -- they're only for
internal projects.  Embecosm has explored creating a virtual
architecture called AAP that was designed to be as wacky as possible,
with the idea being that an upstream AAP port would allow the
out-of-tree ports to publicly discuss their oddities without releasing
the details of their internal ISAs, thus allowing the developers of
these ports to ensure their patches remaining working.

At this point what had started as a silly discussion over lunch had
turned into something more reasonable: rather that building a virtual
ISA with 16-bit bytes, why not just create a custom RISC-V based ISA
with 16-bit bytes?  The advantage here is that the ISA is fairly easy to
write down, which allows everyone to get on the same page -- the other
concrete ISAs in this space are all secret, which is what's really
driving the headache of supporting them in software in the first place.
Of course, all the software would be horribly broken on such an ISA (and
I don't know anyone who would have the time to make it work), but at
least it's somewhere to start.

The result was a somewhat interesting discussion, and a possible place
where having an open standard ISA could dramatically improve the state
of the open source software ecosystem for everyone.  It's also a big
pile of work that I'm sure I'll regret having brought up in a decade :)

### A CGEN-Based RISC-V Backend

One session that I missed (due to jet lag) but wanted to attend was the
[CGEN Tutorial](https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/cauldron2018#cgen), which is a
tool designed to make writing backends for GNU tools easy.  A prototype
RISC-V backend based on CGEN was presented, which is a natural fit for
the extendability of the RISC-V ISA.

## Bay Area RISC-V Meetup

## Deprecating `riscv-tools`

## Events

* September 21st: [ORConf](https://orconf.org/) hosted by the Gdansk
  University of Technology in Gdansk, Poland.
* October 18: [RISC-V Day
  Tokyo](https://tmt.knect365.com/risc-v-day-tokyo/) hosted by Keio
  University in Tokyo, Japan.
* October 22: [RISC-V BoF at Embedded Linux Conference + IoT Summit
  Europe](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/events/elc-openiot-europe-2018/)
  hosted by The Linux Foundation in Edinburgh, UK.
* November 13: [RISC-V Microconference at Linux Plumbers
  Conference](https://blog.linuxplumbersconf.org/2018/) in Vancouver,
  Canada.
* December 3: [RISC-V Summit](https://tmt.knect365.com/risc-v-summit/)
  in Santa Clara, CA.

## Contributing to "Last Week in RISC-V"

Like everything else in the RISC-V ecosystem, this won't be possible as
just a one-man effort.  I'm hosting the sources at
[github.com/sifive/last-week-in-risc-v](https://github.com/sifive/last-week-in-risc-v),
so if you're comfortable editing them feel free to open a pull request.
If you don't want to get involved in GitHub then you're also welcome to
just mail me patches or blurbs for inclusion and I can merge them
together.

I don't really have any specific criteria as to what will or won't be
included.  Part of the reason I'm doing this is that the RISC-V
ecosystem has started to get big enough that there are huge sections of
it that I know nothing about, so I think the starting criteria will be
"anything I'm interested enough in to want to read" and we'll just go
from there!
